---
title: "Documenting Rcpp functions and classes in R packages"
author: "Artem Sokolov and Dirk Eddelbuettel"
license: GPL (>= 2)
tags: modules basics
date: 2020-01-02
summary: Demonstrates how to add Roxygen blocks in .cpp source
layout: post
src: 2020-01-02-documenting-rcpp-packages.Rmd
---

### Introduction

[Roxygen2](https://cran.r-project.org/package=roxygen2) is a convenient way to
document functions in R packages. Based on the
[Doxygen](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Doxygen) model, it parses relevant
information from the comments and generates the corresponding `man/*.Rd` files.
The major strength of this model -- besides not having to write `*.Rd` files by
hand -- is that documentation ends up living right next to the functionality it
describes, thus enabling easy maintenance and synchronization between the two.

When using Rcpp in package development, the R functions in `RcppExports.R` are
generated automatically from the source `.cpp` files. Rcpp also faithfully
transcribes comment blocks from `.cpp` to `.R`. We can take advantage of this
fact to add documentation directly to the `.cpp` files and have it appear in the
package reference manual.

This vignette demonstrates four different ways to document Rcpp functions and
classes in R packages. We will create an R package from scratch, add some very
basic functionality and show how Roxygen2 blocks appear in the final
documentation. Throughout the vignette, we will focus on base R, Rcpp and
roxygen2 with no additional dependencies. There are a number of popular add-on
packages helping with package development (_e.g._ `devtools`, `remotes`,
`usethis` as of January 2020), and these additional helpers may be reviewed in a
follow-up vignette.  In case Rcpp or roxygen2 are not yet installed, do


{% highlight r %}
install.packages(c("Rcpp","roxygen2"))
{% endhighlight %}

### Create a package

We begin by initializing a package skeleton. The following function creates a
new directory and establishes a barebones structure for an R package with Rcpp
support:


{% highlight r %}
Rcpp::Rcpp.package.skeleton("testpkg", path="~/test/")
{% endhighlight %}

To demonstrate how Roxygen comment blocks affect the visibility of functions, we
need to give it control over `NAMESPACE`. By default, Roxygen2 will not modify
the `NAMESPACE` file, if it was generated by another source (such as 
`Rcpp.package.skeleton()` in this case). Let's remove this file, and let
Roxygen2 generate its own. Instead of deleting the file, we can simply rename it:

{% highlight bash %}
mv NAMESPACE NAMESPACE.bkp
{% endhighlight %}

Next, using your favorite text editor, create a new file
`~/test/testpkg/R/zzz.R` and add the following lines to it:


{% highlight r %}
#' @useDynLib testpkg
NULL

Rcpp::loadModule("double_cpp", TRUE)
{% endhighlight %}

`useDynLib` directs Roxygen to add a NAMESPACE entry exposing the dynamic
library compiled from the .cpp source. Likewise `loadModule` exposes the
functionality of an
[Rcpp module](http://dirk.eddelbuettel.com/code/rcpp/Rcpp-modules.pdf) that we
will use to encapsulate our C++ class. Replace `"double_cpp"` with your desired
module name, but note that the name has to match what appears in the `.cpp` file
below.

### Add C++ functionality and Roxygen2 comment blocks

All code blocks presented in this section are part of the same contiguous `.cpp`
file. Edit `~/test/testpkg/src/rcpp_hello_world.cpp` that was generated by
`Rcpp.package.skeleton()` and replace its content with the code chunks below.
Each chunks presents one of the four different ways to introduce Roxygen2
comment blocks inside `.cpp` files.

#### Approach 1: Standalone functions

The first approach is the most straightforward and mimics traditional usage of
Roxygen2 in pure R packages. The comments are placed immediately before a
stand-alone function and begin with `//'`, which Rcpp will translate into `#'`
in the corresponding `RcppExports.R` file:


{% highlight cpp %}
#include <Rcpp.h>
using namespace Rcpp;

//' Multiplies two doubles
//'
//' @param v1 First value
//' @param v2 Second value
//' @return Product of v1 and v2
//' @export
// [[Rcpp::export]]
double mult( double v1, double v2 ) {return v1*v2;}
{% endhighlight %}

You may notice two `export` keywords used in the comment block. The first,
`@export`, tells Roxygen2 to add a `NAMESPACE` entry that will make the function
visibile to the end users of your package. Remove this line if the function
should be internal to the package.

The second keyword, `[[Rcpp::export]]`, is the standard Rcpp attribute that
makes the function available in R. Since it has no interaction with `Roxygen2`,
the comment is annotated with the traditional `//` instead. Remove this line if
the function is to remain internal within the C++ code.

#### Approach 2: Nested field structure

Classes impose an additional layer of hierarchy by grouping multiple functions
and variables. We need to decide how this hierarchy should be represented in
the R help pages, which themselves follow a flat format. If a class is
relatively small, a simple solution is to use a nested field structure to
describe individual member functions. The entire class will then appear as a
single entry in the final package reference manual.


{% highlight cpp %}
//' @name Double
//' @title Encapsulates a double
//' @description Type the name of the class to see its methods
//' @field new Constructor
//' @field mult Multiply by another Double object \itemize{
//' \item Parameter: other - The other Double object
//' \item Returns: product of the values
//' }
//' @export
class Double {
public:
  Double( double v ) : value(v) {}
  double mult( const Double& other ) {return value * other.value;}
private:
  double value;
};
{% endhighlight %}

#### Approach 3: Stand-alone pages for individual class methods

Occasionally, a member function may be complex enough to require its own `?`\
reference entry. A major advantage of Roxygen2 is that such entries can be
created with relative ease by placing the corresponding comment block at the top
level in a file.


{% highlight js %}
//' @name Double$new
//' @title Constructs a new Double object
//' @param v A value to encapsulate
{% endhighlight %}

The only disadvantage is that the documentation does not live directly next to
the function it describes. Unforunately, this is due to a limitation that only
the top-level comment blocks are exported into R by Rcpp.

#### Approach 4: Rcpp module docstrings

The final place for function documentation is inside the docstring feature
provided by the Rcpp modules themselves. This works well for relatively simple
classes. Unfortunately, the documentation becomes overly verbose, if a class
makes heavy use of templates.


{% highlight cpp %}
RCPP_EXPOSED_CLASS(Double)
RCPP_MODULE(double_cpp) {
  class_<Double>("Double")
    .constructor<double>("Wraps a double")
    .method("mult", &Double::mult, "Multiply by another Double object")
    ;
}
{% endhighlight %}

### Compile, install and test

Since we overwrote the contents of `src/rcpp_hello_world.cpp`, the current
`man/*.Rd` pages are now obsolete and describe functions that are no longer
available. Clean up the `man/` directory prior to having Roxygen2 generate help
pages for our new class and functions:


{% highlight bash %}
rm ~/test/testpkg/man/*.Rd
{% endhighlight %}

We are now ready to build the package and its corresponding documentation.
Run the following commands in an R session somewhere inside `~/test/testpkg`:


{% highlight r %}
Rcpp::compileAttributes()   # this updates the Rcpp layer from C++ to R
roxygen2::roxygenize()      # this updates the documentation based on roxygen comments
{% endhighlight %}

followed by the usual `R CMD build` and `R CMD install` (or equivalent helper
functions via RStudio, the `usethis` or `devtools` package, or alike). 

The first command compiles the `.cpp` code and generates `R/RcppExports.R`. You
will notice that the roxygen comment blocks are faithfully transcribed from
`.cpp` to `.R`. The second command then generates the `man/*.Rd` files based on
these roxygen blocks. Having prepared the sources, we then build and install the
package as usual, making it available through the standard `library(testpkg)`
interface.

To test the package and view its documentation, start a fresh R session and examine the help pages.


{% highlight r %}
library( help=testpkg )     # Lists three functions: Double, Double$new and mult
?testpkg::mult              # Approach 1: stand-alone functions
?testpkg::Double            # Approach 2: nested field structure
?testpkg::`Double$new`      # Approach 3: individual class methods
testpkg::Double             # Approach 4: docstrings
{% endhighlight %}

We can also make sure that the package functions as expected.


{% highlight r %}
testpkg::mult(2, 3)    
# [1] 6

d1 = testpkg::Double$new(5)
d2 = testpkg::Double$new(3)
d1$mult(d2)
# [1] 15
{% endhighlight %}
